.\" Created from Texinfo source by yat2m 1.0
.TH SYMCRYPTRUN 1 2013-01-27 "GnuPG 2.0.19" "GNU Privacy Guard"
.SH NAME
.B symcryptrun
\- Call a simple symmetric encryption tool
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  symcryptrun
.B \-\-class
.I class
.B \-\-program
.I program
.B \-\-keyfile
.I keyfile
.RB [ --decrypt | --encrypt ]
.RI [ inputfile ]

.SH DESCRIPTION
Sometimes simple encryption tools are already in use for a long time and
there might be a desire to integrate them into the GnuPG framework.  The
protocols and encryption methods might be non-standard or not even
properly documented, so that a full-fledged encryption tool with an
interface like gpg is not doable.  \fBsymcryptrun\fR provides a
solution: It operates by calling the external encryption/decryption
module and provides a passphrase for a key using the standard
\fBpinentry\fR based mechanism through \fBgpg-agent\fR.

Note, that \fBsymcryptrun\fR is only available if GnuPG has been
configured with \(aq--enable-symcryptrun\(aq at build time.



For encryption, the plain text must be provided on STDIN or as the
argument \fIinputfile\fR, and the ciphertext will be output to STDOUT.
For decryption vice versa.

\fICLASS\fR describes the calling conventions of the external tool.
Currently it must be given as \(aqconfucius\(aq.  \fIPROGRAM\fR is
the full filename of that external tool.

For the class \(aqconfucius\(aq the option \fB--keyfile\fR is
required; \fIkeyfile\fR is the name of a file containing the secret key,
which may be protected by a passphrase.  For detailed calling
conventions, see the source code.


Note, that \fBgpg-agent\fR must be running before starting
\fBsymcryptrun\fR.


The following additional options may be used:

.TP
.B  -v
.TP
.B  --verbose
Output additional information while running.

.TP
.B  -q
.TP
.B  --quiet
Try to be as quiet as possible.

.TP
.B  --homedir \fIdir\fR
Set the name of the home directory to \fIdir\fR. If this option is not
used, the home directory defaults to \(oq\fI~/.gnupg\fR\(cq.  It is only
recognized when given on the command line.  It also overrides any home
directory stated through the environment variable \(oq\fIGNUPGHOME\fR\(cq or
(on W32 systems) by means of the Registry entry
\fIHKCU\\Software\\GNU\\GnuPG:HomeDir\fR.



.TP
.B  --log-file \fIfile\fR
Append all logging output to \fIfile\fR.  Default is to write logging
information to STDERR.



The possible exit status codes of \fBsymcryptrun\fR are:

.TP
.B  0
        Success.
.TP
.B  1
        Some error occured.
.TP
.B  2
        No valid passphrase was provided.
.TP
.B  3
        The operation was canceled by the user.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgpg\fR(1),
\fBgpgsm\fR(1),
\fBgpg-agent\fR(1),

The full documentation for this tool is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If GnuPG and the info program are properly installed at your site, the
command

.RS 2
.nf
info gnupg
.fi
.RE

should give you access to the complete manual including a menu structure
and an index.



