.\" Created from Texinfo source by yat2m 1.0
.TH WATCHGNUPG 1 2013-01-27 "GnuPG 2.0.19" "GNU Privacy Guard"
.SH NAME
.B watchgnupg
\- Read and print logs from a socket
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B  watchgnupg
.RB [ \-\-force ]
.RB [ \-\-verbose ]
.I socketname

.SH DESCRIPTION
Most of the main utilities are able to write their log files to a Unix
Domain socket if configured that way.  \fBwatchgnupg\fR is a simple
listener for such a socket.  It ameliorates the output with a time stamp
and makes sure that long lines are not interspersed with log output from
other utilities.  This tool is not available for Windows.



\fBwatchgnupg\fR is commonly invoked as

.RS 2
.nf
watchgnupg --force ~/.gnupg/S.log

.SH OPTIONS

\fBwatchgnupg\fR understands these options:


.TP
.B  --force
Delete an already existing socket file.


.TP
.B  --tcp \fIn\fR
Instead of reading from a local socket, listen for connects on TCP port
\fIn\fR.

.TP
.B  --verbose
Enable extra informational output.

.TP
.B  --version
Print version of the program and exit.

.TP
.B  --help
Display a brief help page and exit.



.SH EXAMPLES

.RS 2
.nf
$ watchgnupg --force /home/foo/.gnupg/S.log
.fi
.RE

This waits for connections on the local socket
\(oq\fI/home/foo/.gnupg/S.log\fR\(cq and shows all log entries.  To make this
work the option \fBlog-file\fR needs to be used with all modules
which logs are to be shown.  The value for that option must be given
with a special prefix (e.g. in the conf file):

.RS 2
.nf
log-file socket:///home/foo/.gnupg/S.log
.fi
.RE

For debugging purposes it is also possible to do remote logging.  Take
care if you use this feature because the information is send in the
clear over the network.  Use this syntax in the conf files:

.RS 2
.nf
log-file tcp://192.168.1.1:4711
.fi
.RE

You may use any port and not just 4711 as shown above; only IP addresses
are supported (v4 and v6) and no host names.  You need to start
\fBwatchgnupg\fR with the \fBtcp\fR option.  Note that under
Windows the registry entry \fIHKCU\\Software\\GNU\\GnuPG:DefaultLogFile\fR
can be used to change the default log output from \fBstderr\fR to
whatever is given by that entry.  However the only useful entry is a TCP
name for remote debugging.


.SH SEE ALSO
\fBgpg\fR(1),
\fBgpgsm\fR(1),
\fBgpg-agent\fR(1),
\fBscdaemon\fR(1)

The full documentation for this tool is maintained as a Texinfo manual.
If GnuPG and the info program are properly installed at your site, the
command

.RS 2
.nf
info gnupg
.fi
.RE

should give you access to the complete manual including a menu structure
and an index.






